Folklore Thursday: The Use of Linen Bandages–An “Oh My Ra” Post
September 15, 2016

Hello, Constant Followers and welcome to #FolkloreThursday, the Dark Corners off-shoot of the weekly event started by the wonderful people at Folklore Thursday. Folklore Thursday was originally started to celebrate folklore and folks stories from around the world. This segment is Dark Corners tribute to the original concept, though I do not claim any credit or affiliation with that site.

Folklore can be defined as “a body of popular myth and beliefs relating to a particular place, activity, or group of people.”

From what I learned in my brief study of folklore in college, this usually meant that folk traditions were passed by word of mouth. Folk stories can be spread down through the generations by telling and re-telling. Other folk traditions are carried out in a given setting include attire, methods of construction, myth cycles, language (sometimes complicated by dialect), heroic figures, and cult religions not controlled directly by the primary religious influences.

This week I began the tedious task of staining my linen bandages for my project series entitle, “Oh My Ra”, showcasing the process by which I construct a Worbla armor cosplay of the Tomb Kings from Warhammer, the incredible body of lore centered around the tabletop game of the same name. The Tomb Kings of Warhammer were entirely based on the Ancient Egyptian culture.

Plot Holes In the History

(Taken predominately from the reading of Bob Brier’s book, Egyptian Mummification: Unraveling the Mysteries of An Ancient Art)

There is no definitive guide to Egyptian mummification. Techniques varied between the very early (perhaps as early as the Fourth Dynasty) and very last dynasties. Toward the end of the reign of the indigenous kings, the techniques had been taken over first by the Greek, then by Roman occupiers. There are a number of other supporting theories as to why there is no definitive guide, no play-by-play rule book to the sacred act of mummification. One is that during each of the unstable periods (called Intermediate Periods), the practice was not as closely adhered to as in previous or following ages. Since these periods could last upwards of centuries, it’s logical that certain of the practices were lost. Another is that politics and current events often shaped the practice of mummification, and post-humous retaliation has made for an inconsistent timeline for many of the known mummies, muddying study and identification. The reign of Amenhotep IV, who renamed himself Ankhenaten (known to the general public as the father of Tutankhamen) is just such an example of political upheaval affecting the mortuary cults of Egypt. The Pharaoh that would be called Ankhenaten cast down the priests of the old gods and proclaimed himself the high-priest of a monotheistic religion which his son, Tut, was only too happy to disband upon his father’s death.

Perhaps the most logical reason mummification had no set rulebook–the way Christianity has the Holy Bible upon which to base it’s assertions regarding the afterlife–is that mummification and the mortuary practice was an entire industry. Whole sections of society were devoted to the industry of mummification: coffin makers, tomb designers, priests of the numerous cults in each region, even hawkers of the mummies of dead animals for the shrines to Thoth and others all had a part to play in the daily life of the average Egyptian and their deep-seated connection to the afterlife. The economy of mummification was dependent on each citizen’s caste; the level of devotion, the size of the funeral, and even the process of how your body was mummified all depended on how much money your family had. Of course, royalty was treated as such, but as the dubious historian Herodotus described, there were certain levels of care that were taken with each body. When a family member died, his remaining kin beat their breasts, tore their hair, covered their faces with mud, and made their wailing way down to the embalmers’ hut. The undertaker would wheel out wooden caskets (according to Herodotus), each depicting an available level of embalming. The cheapest were undoubtedly for paupers. The very wealthy got some of the best treatment short of royalty–for a price.

Though Herodotus couldn’t be trusted in most things as far as he could be thrown, it is easy to imagine, and verified by certain remains found, that each person’s fate was determined by how much gold they could pony up at the end.

The most prevalent theory regarding the undocumented way in which mummification was handled was that the art was passed from master to apprentice, and each priest and sacred person associated with the mortuary cults were taught the ancient practice as his master before him had learned it, making the industry of mummification the most epic pieces of oral tradition, and with that, the best kept secret in history. We are still learning about this process, and though technology has gone a long way to aiding our search for the truth in this matter, it seems that there will always be a few things lost to the sands of time. One thing that is very well documented, easy to see, and verified by numerous examples is the prevalence and importance of wrapping the body in linen bandages.

Linen Bandages

 There were a number of reasons linen (spun fibers of Flax woven into a light, comfortable cloth) bandages were used. For many, linen garments were all you were buried in. The poor would be buried in whatever linen shirts or skirts they possessed. The very rich could be buried in their expensive linen bed sheets. Even Pharaohs and queens were buried in linen bandages torn from their bed sheets and curtains. Linen is a wonderful cloth. It’s fibers are breathable, making it perfect for desert wear. A few layers of it as bed sheets made very adequate blankets to keep off the desert night chill. When washed and used, time and water and use cause the thin, but stiff, linen fibers to soften, making it a light-weight, warm, soft fabric that anyone would be happy to have in their home, not least of all myself.

Certainly the expense of most textiles had a large part to play in the material used for the bandages. Lidia Plaza, my partner in the on-going (sometimes screaming hell parade) project, wrote extensively regarding the reasons for the theft of textiles in the Eighteenth-Century, attributing the expense of textiles to theft and citing court records as her primary source. Textiles, up until recently, have always held their value. The price of precious metals would dip and rise, and most other markets for consumer goods were shaky, but textiles could be horded (sometimes for decades and generations), passed on as heirlooms, sold for hard coin, used, reused, and resold second hand. This seems to have held true for the Ancient Egyptians.

Linen bandages were the most expensive part of the mummification process. Though the production of linen  was profitable, it was by no means cheap, and lean floods in the Nile Valley could spell doom for whole Flax crops, driving the price of linen sky-high. It was illogical to purchase and shred fresh linen for the use of mummification when even the most sad pauper had a linen shirt to use. It was not until much later (think Greek and Roman occupation) that linen bandages were made specifically for mortuary preparation. Though some corpses were covered in up to a hundred yards of linen, it was not until much later that the art of linen wrapping really took off, and linen was cut and sewn specifically to be used as bandages.

This is an example of a Greco-Roman mummy. There is a "fayum" portrait over the cartonage, and the linen bandages have been wound into intricate geometric shapes.

Notice the portrait, or Fayum, and intricate linen wrappings.

This is an example of a Greco-Roman mummy. Notice the intricate pattern of weaving over the cartonage, and the Fayum portrait depicting a Grecian youth. The Greeks noticed the late dynasties’ penchant for stylized weaving of the layers of linen, and so adopted it themselves.

Linen bandages were also torn from bed sheets and curtains as a fitting addition to the slew of objects the mummified person would need in the afterlife. Soldiers were buried with weapons. Artisans were buried with their tools. Royalty were usually buried with all manner of leisure and sport objects. Anything the person would find useful in the afterlife, or that had served them well in this life, would be buried with them. It made sense to be buried in the same linens you slept in. What could be more comforting? Mmm, smells like me.

#OhMyRa Linen Bandages and My Tomb King Cosplay

I would have torn up my own bed sheets, but I sort of like those. Instead, I got on eBay and bought myself 30 square feet of European Linen. Though I’m operating on a budget, this was relatively inexpensive. I bought five yards for $32 American from a lovely lady in Maryland that worked with me on shipping, making this the least expensive part of this cosplay. As an example, each of my forehead prosthetics will cost $40 a piece. You cannot beat linen for authenticity and cost-effectiveness. Avoid fabric stores. Their overhead contributes to their ridiculous prices. Avoid old linens, and read descriptions carefully. I almost bought eighty-year-old linen (1930 or so). You will feel terrible that you ripped thirty feet of linen from 1878. Fortunately these types of fabric hold their value. Linen from 1878 (unless the seller can’t verify the date) will usually be priced accordingly.

Here I can be seen tearing long strips of cloth off of a fifteen foot long section of linen fabric.

I tore my own bandages for my Warhammer Tomb Kings Cosplay.

True to tradition, I decided to tear linen strips instead of cutting them. First of all, I can’t cut in a straight line. Second, I did not have all night. And third, well, I don’t think any other Egyptians used their Singer scissors to cut through their linen. Nope, good old fashioned tearing. I did snip the fabric in order to start the tear.


I continue to tear bandages. It took an hour or so to finish tearing the entire fifteen feet.

It took an hour to tear all of it.

By the end of it, my mouth was so tight I could hardly talk, my shoulders were knotted, and I had a migraine the next day, but it was all done in one night.

I began rolling up the bandages for safe storage and arranged them on my bed.

Roles of linen bandages torn from European linen.

From a sheet of linen fifteen feet long and a little less than a yard wide, I managed to get fourteen rolls of linen bandages that are four inches wide and fifteen feet long.

Next came the passive task of staining the bandages to a brown color. Now, I don’t need to tell you how off-base the average YouTuber is  when it comes to the reason behind the color of their linen bandages (usually cut from pillow cases, or store-bought gauze. Savages. Usurian forbid!). For the most part, any costume fanatic, SFX fan, or cosplayer will tell you that clean bandages aren’t ideal. Stained, dirty bandages are the order, but not for the reason you might think. Linen bandages did not necessarily take on their brown color from being “aged”. Most often linen bandages were brown in color because resin was used to adhere the bandages to the body and lock in that extra fresh Natron essence. Amulets were woven into the body’s bandages and protected with resin. So much resin was used on some bodies that they had to be hacked out of their coffins before untried “Egyptologists” could get a look at them.

My purpose for the Tomb Kings Cosplay is to give the impression that my warrior body was in its tomb for some time before emerging at the call of Nagash the Undying. However, I won’t be achieving this with bandages alone. In addition to my bandages and armor, I will also use liquid latex and grease paint to give the impression that I am in fact, dead on my feet. Therefore, the bandages will not be brown from age, but rather as a result of having been used in mummification as part of my mortuary preparation.

I used my stainless steel kitchen sink and filled it with hot water, instant coffee, and tea bags to stain my linen a brown, "resin" color.

Staining linen bandages for that “resin” look.

To achieve the “resin-stained” look, I filled my sink with instant coffee (the first time) and loaded it up with my torn bandages. However, in my impatience, I forgot about the process by which fabric is stained, and why it is so difficult to remove staining. You see, fabric is woven of these things called fibers, usually of some plant or animal material. When I spill smoothie in my car as I roll up to work, and I clean it up with a shirt, chances are that the shirt will not be washed immediately. It will sit in my hot car and bake in the Austin sun. When I get home, I’ll throw it in the hamper, and there it shall remain for some time. On Thursday, I will pull the shirt out of the hamper and wash it at Lidia’s. I will pull it from the dryer, examine the smoothie stain, raise my eyes to the ceiling and declare, “How did that happen?”

With my batch of staining linens, I decided to pull them out after only an hour or so. I rinsed them, like an idiot, and hung them up to dry. They were not entirely stained. I had rinsed all the pigment out before it had a chance to soak into the fibers. The Lipton tea batch came out much better.

I am using a plastic tub to soak linen bandages in a Lipton tea stain.

Staining linen bandages was the story of September 2016 for me.

The bright brown tea stain gave me the impression that the bandages would “naturally” take on the color of resin as it soaked through the bandages from previous layers. Since I’ll be wearing armor as well, it is probably not necessary to darken bandages for my base layer. No one will see that layer and it’s an extra step that I don’t have time for. However, I am currently soaking more bandages in a coffee and tea mix stain. I don’t want to appear too uniform . Like the mummies of the al-Bahri cache opposite the ancient city of Luxor, I intend to look a little re-wrapped. Imagine a corpse lying in state for several centuries. Despite whatever care (or lack of care–there were perhaps six bad embalmers for every good priest) was taken with my body, a dead guy standing up in his tomb and walking out is going to cause some damage to the physical form. Like the priests of the Twenty-First Dynasty that re-wrapped and tried to salvage the ravaged and plundered bodies of their own ancestors (what a shock that must have been!), I intend to give the appearance that at some point I had to be re-wrapped. Therefore, layers of darker bandages will be layered over lighter bandages, giving the viewer who comes across me the impression that despite my very intimidating appearance, I’m actually falling apart.

Several strips of fifteen foot long linen bandages hang up to dry in my unused bathroom.

As you can see we dried the bandages in the bathroom known as “The Turkish Prison”.

You can imagine there are very few places to hang that much linen to dry in my apartment. I made use of the unused bathroom tub we have. The drain doesn’t work right, so we don’t use it, as I can’t even get water to drain to clean it. We’ve nick-named it the “Turkish Prison” tub, and it is here that I decided to hang my linen to dry. As you can see, the stain took very well on the tea-stained bandages. The light makes everything look stained and dingy in that bathroom. So I took the following outside on the balcony.

I laid several roles of linen bandages on my porch next to an unstained role. The difference is very stark. The stain definitely changed the color of the bandages.

Easy to see how different the stain makes the bandages look.

It is easy to see the difference in the bandage color. Though I did not use resin, and actually I don’t plan to do much adhering of the bandages except to my face and head for the sake of my art (if not for the sake of realism), the tea and coffee stains have given my bandages the appearance of being stiff with resin, having aged alongside me in my coffin. True to form, the tea and coffee took my previously soft linen and stiffened it considerably, to the point where it will be nearly impossible for someone of my moderate strength to tear the wider strips down into thinner strips for my fingers. It will be time-consuming, but I may have to do a straight-line mark with red chalk or Conte crayon, then use a seam ripper to get the torn effect.

I’ll be very excited to see how the armor fits over the linen. This was a crucial step. If you know anything about Worbla, you’ll know that if you are using it for armor, you’ll need to mold at least a few pieces directly onto your body. To get a correct fit, it’s very important to be wearing what you’ll be using under the armor when you mold it. In my case, I’ll be wearing exactly bra and underwear, and at least two layers of linen bandages.

I hope it’s cold this Halloween. I have a feeling I’m going to be a little warm.

Keep your eyes and ears peeled to my Instagram, Twitter, and Facebook pages as I reveal more of the coming makeup project, more linen fun, and pictures of my Worbla armor as it slowly begins to take shape.

Next week, #OhMyRa will continue with our series of tribute posts to the greats of contemporary and pre-code horror. We started with Boris Karloff and The Mummy. Next, we’ll examine the genius of Lon Chaney and his work on The Phantom of the Opera. For more #OhMyRa fun on Thursdays hit up #FolkloreThursday on Twitter.
