In The Beginning There Was Boris Karloff: an “Oh My Ra” Story
August 27, 2016

“Of all the fictitious mummies, the one that has had the greatest impact and success is Imhotep, the resurrected Egyptian priest played by Boris Karloff in the 1932 film The Mummy. The reason for the success of this fictional treatment above all others is the humanity of the mummy. Imhotep, or Ardath Bey, as he is called in his resurrected state, has a full range of emotions–he lives, fears, and gets angry. He is the lover desperately seeking to be reunited with is love. There is a psychological completeness here that is lacking in the many fictional treatments that precede the film, (Brier, Bob. Egyptian Mummies: Unraveling the Secrets of an Ancient Art; William Morrow and Company Inc; New York, NY 1994 p 299-300).

A black and white photograph of Boris Karloff in a suit and tie.

A portrait of Boris Karloff (1887-1969).

When I was a little girl, I wanted to marry Yul Brynner. I wanted to have lunch every day with Vincent Price, and I wanted to grow up to be Boris Karloff. No, it doesn’t make any sense, but when you’re five years old, you don’t do things that make sense. When you’re five years old (and female), and the old Universal Horrors and Cecil B Demille films are new and bright in your eyes, and your best friends are actors that had been dead for years, you might imagine you’ll grow up one day to be as great as any of them, even if it meant growing up into the forty-two-year-old male British actor, Boris Karloff.

Humble Beginnings

“There is a psychological completeness here…” Bob Brier says in his account of his attempts to reconstruct the methods by which the most skilled of Ancient Egyptian embalmers preserved the dead of old Egypt, Egyptian Mummies: Unraveling the Secrets of an Ancient Art. I’ve long thought that there was something special about Karloff’s mummy, Imhotep, but I suppose I lacked the finesse of Brier’s assessment. The “psychological completeness” of the character of Imhotep/Ardath Bey is uncharacteristic of the portrayal of mummy characters prior to the 1932 film, but it is entirely typical of the style and genius displayed by Boris Karloff in his career as one of the Princes of Hollywood Horror.

Boris Karloff got his start as a two-bit actor making his rounds in Hollywood. In 1926, at the age of 42, he was near to giving up when a chance conversation with Lon Chaney encouraged Karloff to keep trying. Soon he was working on gangster films, where he was likely to have overheard the conversation that sparked his interest in a new Universal horror film (Vieira, Mark A. Hollywood Horror: From Gothic to Cosmic; Harry N Abrams, Inc., New York, NY 2003 p 36-37).

In March of 1930, Carl Laemmle Jr. secured the rights to the Mary Shelly adaptation of Frankenstein, or the Modern Prometheus (stage adaptation) for $20,000, which was half of what it cost him to secure the rights to Dracula in 1929. Hoping to cash in on the success of Dracula, Bela Lugosi was originally planned for the part of the monster, but he was obstinate through the original testing, insisting on his own makeup, and generally downplaying the entire thing. The role was non-verbal, and that was not at all to Lugosi’s liking. He proclaimed to deaf ears that any tall extra could play the part (Vieira, 37).  The honor of directing the film would fall to James Whale, a director and expert from the London stage that was already making a name for himself by bringing his adaptation of Waterloo Bridge to a conclusion ahead of schedule and under budget, aspects of character that were to be much admired in a director during the waxing Depression amid slumping box office profits for studios across the board (Vieira, 37). During edits, Whale noted the possibility of a sympathetic monster, and washed his hands of Bela Lugosi for the part, knowing the actor that gave life to Dracula was not likely to engender sympathy. Whale had seen Karloff in the mystery film, The Criminal Code, and loved the work. Whale’s lackeys found Karloff in the studio commissary (somehow I always feel like people came upon Karloff while he’s eating). Whale invited him to coffee and talked his ear off about nothing until he came to the point, inviting Karloff to test for a “damned awful monster!”. Karloff didn’t flinch. He took the offer. He said, “Of course I was delighted at the prospect of more work because it meant another job if I was able to land it…at the same time I felt rather hurt because at the time I had on very good straight makeup and my best suit–and he wanted to test me for a monster!” (Vieira, 38).

The Genius of Boris Karloff

“Whale and I both saw the creature as the innocent one. Within the heavy restrictions of my makeup, I tried to play it that way,” Karloff said of his performance as the monster in the original Frankenstein (1931) (Vieira, 39).

Boris Karloff is in the makeup for Frankenstein's monster. He crouches behind a piece of machinery or something. The photo is in black and white.

Frankenstein’s monster crouches behind some piece of machinery or workings.

The genius of Karloff’s character is easily seen from the first moments the creature stirs to an abnormal state of animation. Despite the intense makeup, heavily hooded eyes, and huge costume, Karloff and director James Whale created a monster that was at once frightening and endearing. There is no point of the film that does not inspire sorrow for the monster who never asked to be. No part of the monster, for all of its heterogeneous parts and lumbering gate, suggests it is anything but an infantile victim born to doom. Karloff adds a childishness to the monster as it learns to speak and interact with the sweet friar the finds him. Karloff adds the well-meaning but overly anxious aggression of an abused animal to the scene in which the monster drowns the little girl. Putty was used to give the monster, heavy, dumb eyes, disguising Karloff’s own bright, intelligent ones. Karloff was entirely human inside the monster, lending a semblance of humanity that the creature was supposed to possess. He lurched, lumbered, pawed, and groped his way through the character with such sincerity and feeling. He caused the filming crew at Lake Sherwood to stay inordinately late arguing with James Whale about the necessity of showing the drowning of a young girl on screen (38). He wore struts and pavement boots to lend him awkward height. I watched the film in one sitting one morning before work, and cried through most of it. His sleeves were shortened to give him the appearance of his arms being too long for his body. His head was layered in cheese cloth and collodion to give it the seamless, square shape. He was a marvel of modern cinema effects, and deep inside Karloff’s makeup was the “psychological completeness” Bob Brier noticed in another of Karloff’s monsters who took the screen some years later, in 1932, on a high-budget film that further cemented him into the fabric of early pre-code Universal Horror.

The Mummy
Boris Karloff lays with his arms across his chest. He is upright in a coffin in full makeup for his role as a risen mummy. The coffin is propped up. Karloff's eyes are closed. Imhotep rests in uneasy sleep.

Boris Karloff propped up in his coffin in his portrayal of the wicked priest, Imhotep.

Though Frankenstein was Karloff’s most iconic role, it was not the first film I had ever seen him in. The first time I ever saw Karloff on film, it was in the 1932 film, The Mummy. As a child, I spent my days enamored of the Ancient Egyptian culture, though childishly enough I thought there were only two Pharaohs: Ramses I and Ramses II. This is due in large part to the fact that as a child, I did not have access to extensive historical documents such as those available to me now, and in truth Yul Brynner’s portrayal of Ramses in The Ten Commandments might have informed my speculation about the existence of other Pharaohs. It made sense. Ramses was Pharaoh. There were two Pharaohs named Ramses (actually there were about eleven, but eight-year-olds don’t know that) badda bing badda boom. It was not until I saw Karloff on-screen that I could subscribe to the idea that there had been other mummies, and maybe other Pharaohs. It was only natural that I should be introduced to Boris Karloff in a film regarding the rising of an Ancient Egyptian mummy. I was drawn to the makeup, the frightful aspect of the monster, and then I was quickly bored. I was a child. What I wanted was to visit a museum and sit next to a mummy (ideally one that looked just like Karloff) and have him whisper to me all the secrets of the dead civilization. What I got was an old love story. Blah.

Years later, watching the film over Halloween, I was awestruck. Karloff’s portrayal through the painful makeup of Imhotep was so frightening, so imposing and intimidating, and he was taller than everyone else in the film. He was angry: at himself, at those who murdered him; he was angry at the loss of his beloved; he grieved like no other lover in the world; he knew the unimaginable and nameless terror of being mummified and buried alive. He rested in his uneasy tomb for 3,700 years. When he awoke, he was in a new world, but he had already been broken. He had now the stone heart of the conqueror, and the Scroll of Thoth gave him power over life and death. He was polite and civil in one moment, and commanding in the next. Perhaps the most endearing aspect of Karloff’s portrayal was the scene before he attempts to kill and mummify Helen Grosvenor, the reincarnation of his lost, forbidden  love, the vestal virgin of Isis, Ankh-sen-amen. Karloff kneels beside Ankh-sen-amen’s couch, imploring her to look into his own eyes to spare her the horror of her shocking surroundings, knowing she had traveled down the centuries to inhabit a body that was not her own, with her own coffin laying lifeless in a museum case behind him. He utters such kind words to her before revealing the magnitude of the horror of his own being, the unnatural life he now possessed, and the unnatural life he intended to work upon her. Then it is revealed: the sweet priest Ankh-sen-amen had known in Thebes was dead and gone, and the only thing that was left was the hard shell of a man bereaved beyond endurance, tortured before a slow death, and then animated to a semblance of humanity. Though he loved her, he was not best pleased at her hesitance. It made no sense to him, and Imhotep laid it out for her in an accusing tone, “For thy sake I was buried alive! I ask of thee only a moment of agony. Only so can we be united!”

My major criticism of the film is purely a historical one that has nothing to do with the picturesque. The entire embalming process was not known then, and it is not fully known now. Helen/Ankh-sen-amen and Imhotep stand in the museum–as if that made little enough sense–as a brainwashed Nubian servant stirs a boiling pot of something (as I said, this part makes little sense historically). I am a little perturbed these days to hear her moan, “That is the bath of Natron. You shall not plunge my body into that!”

First, it espouses the largely debunked theory that the Natron bath was actually a bath, as in Natron dissolved in water into which the corpse was submerged. Though that theory still circulates, Bob Brier asserts that the Natron bath was actually a bath of dry Natron used to desiccate the bodies after internal organs had been removed. Second, it encourages a very picturesque and unhealthy notion that Lovecraft probably touched on a bit in his story “Under the Pyramids” (ghostwritten for Harry Houdini), the notion that the Ancient Egyptian practice of preserving their dead came from an unnatural obsession with death, rather than as a celebration of this life, and the next. This unnatural obsession was not only a point of acute horror of the process described by the Ancient Egyptians in which the Ka of the mummified human could re-enter the body and allow it to be resurrected, but also a point of horror that came with the fear of what is not fully understood, a purely Hollywood reaction to an Ancient Civilization’s unknowable motivations and half-understood rituals. Historically accurate was not going to sell a film, and so the mummy is evil. End of story. Thank you for choosing AMC Theaters. Don’t forget to dispose of your popcorn bowls in the trash can conveniently located beside the exit.

Yet, for all my talk of historical accuracy, what must have the general public thought of the photographs of Seti I and Ramses I when they were unwrapped? Vieira points out that the discovery of Tuts tomb in 1924 was still very relevant during the film’s inception. There was mystery, horrors unimaginable, and a metric ton of market potential to capitalize on the whispered fears of a general public who stared at the desiccated faces coated in resin, their features preserved for more than 3,000 years. There were people inside those linen bandages. It was this aspect of Karloff’s mummy that was so frightening. Inside this shambling corpse was a very angry soul, but a soul nonetheless.

Boris Karloff stands before the Pharaoh in white linen shirt, white linen head dress, and skirt with gold inlays. The film is in black and white. He is flanked by guards, he is now a prisoner, caught working unspeakable black magic to regain the life of his lost princess.

Handsome Boris Karloff. All right, I think he’s handsome.

Also, can we talk about how handsome he was? I mean seriously, the man I swear is somehow related to Jeremy Irons. Even that lisp was cute.

Karloff the Eternal Sufferer: SFX for The Mummy

The makeup used on Karloff for this film was the most painful of his career. For a man who could portray the stolid, angry, rigid figures of the films he played in, he detested the makeup. He commented that the makeup for The Mummy was, “”the most trying ordeal I have ever endured,”” saying the, “”physical exhaustion was nothing compared to the nervous exhaustion I suffered,”” (Vieira 58). It took eight hours to wrap him up. Rigid collodion and layers of cotton covered his face, adhered with the unholy smelling spirit gum, a pain I know only too well. I hate rigid collodion. After two hours, he could no longer speak. Clay was adhered to his head and sculpted to match the pictures of Seti II. He was wrapped in linen bandages that had been distressed with acid and scorched in an oven to give them the dried out appearance of having been doused in bitumen resin. He couldn’t move, or talk, and he could not use the bathroom. He was wheeled into the sound stage at 7 pm, and that’s where he stayed until 2 am. It took two hours to remove the collodion and cotton mess, and it was a process he would have to repeat. Karloff was perhaps one of the most abused actors in the business. Even after he appealed to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences to intervene regarding his exhausting and abusive treatment on the set of Frankenstein, The Mummy was even more emotionally and physically taxing. Ideally, using Karloff as the mummy instead of a dummy mummy (yeah I did that) made more sense to director Karl Freund, who wanted to get Karloff into the costume and shoot the first scene all in one day. There was no budget for an extra mummy that looked enough like Karloff to pull this off. These days, in addition to the actor in makeup, a silicone life cast of the actor would have been used to simulate the actor in the coffin, and actually would have been less expensive, as the less time an actor spends on set, the better.

Vieire reports, though, that Karloff was rewarded, even vindicated, for his treatment by the rave reviews from both the critics and the public regarding The Mummy. Critic Andre Sennwald wrote, “”for purposes of terror, there are two scenes in The Mummy that weird enough in all conscience. In the first, the mummy comes alive and a young archaeologist, going quite mad, laughs in a way that raises the hair on the scalp. In the second, Imhotep is embalmed alive, and that moment when the tape is drawn across the man’s mouth and nose, leaving only his wild eyes staring out of the coffin, is one of decided horror,”” (Vieire 58).

Sennewald was not wrong. If you’ve seen The Mummy (and it’s only an hour long, so there’s no excuse if you haven’t) then you’ll understand the look on Karloff’s face as the embalmers wrap him alive in linen bandages and place him in his coffin, ostensibly while he is still alive, but perhaps unconscious. It is a look of wild-eyed terror that intensifies as the bandages are wrapped over the nose and mouth. He struggled hard against the bandages, but to no avail. Some mummies were wrapped in over 1,500 feet of linen. To a young child–or even a fully-grown adult–this is the most frightening scene in the whole film.

Conclusion

Boris Karloff did not just have an indelible effect on me as a child, prompting me to begin my cosplay career with my own tribute to his masterwork. Boris Karloff, following the footsteps of his friend and mentor, Lon Chaney, defined the pre-code horror genre, infusing it with the concepts and methods sfx makeup artists and character designers still use today. Nothing can ever replace the vintage horror genre, and in no way will horror ever return to those glory days. Few actors today subscribe to the old ways, but the legacy of Boris Karloff lives on in actors like Doug Jones and directors like Guillermo Del Toro.

There seems to be some mix of fate in coming across the quote from Bob Brier that began this article, for only last night, I had the delightful surprise of watching The Black Cat and The Body Snatcher on TMC. Each film gave Karloff the opportunity to present the fullness of his range, the presence he exudes on screen. One’s eye is immediately drawn to him. Handsome, imposing, and intimidating, Boris Karloff was not only a master of his craft, but a reminder that inside the monstrous horrors presented on screen, there is a human being at the center of it, and though the lids might be hooded with putty, there is no mistaking the jovial good nature in his laughing eyes or the intelligence and wit behind that cheeky grin. There was not an actor like Karloff before, and there will never be another.

My work on my own special effects creations is as much a part of my own art as it is to the allegiance and honor I owe my predecessors. The next part of this series will explore Karloff’s own inspiration, the original Hollywood Monster, Lon Chaney.
