Happy Birthday Brad Dourif!
March 18, 2016

Brad Dourif, seen here sitting in a leather jacket and sporting a mustache, is a prolific method actor famous for his role as Chucky in Child's Play, but who has also been in several roles in famous shows such as The X: Files, Star Trek Voyager, and Law and Order: Special Victim's Unit.

The actor Brad Dourif as he greets his receiving line at a convention.

On this day in our glorious history, Bradford Claude Dourif was born in Huntington, West Virginia. If Morgan Freeman were narrating this, he would say that March 18, 1950 was the beginning of a life of talent followed by a career of sheer awesomeness. I have the feeling that if Chucky were narrating this, he would have similar sentiments–with more F bombs.

I have always considered Brad Dourif to be perhaps one of the greatest, most versatile, and most animated actors of our age. The man that brought us Chucky in Childsplay has performed every role he’s ever taken up with depth and commitment. I probably first saw him, and knew his actual face, as Grimma Wormtongue in The Two Towers. I knew he had played Chucky, but I had no idea the extent of his immense resume. In everything from Star Trek: Voyager to Law and Order: SVU, Brad Dourif has brought villains, heroes, scientists, and ordinary men to life that will make you question solidity of your own reality.

What truly drew me to his talent was his performance as Luther Lee Boggs in The X: Files Season 2, Episode 5, “Beyond the Sea”. Dourif portrayed Boggs as ruthless in one breath, and penitent in the next. Boggs had forced pain and terror on his many victims without remorse, but Boggs transcends normal humanity through the acquisition of psychic powers that allowed him feel his victims fear and horror as he strode warily through the halls of Raleigh State Penitentiary towards the gas chamber, and his own death. Though the episode is probably one of the most poorly-written of the X:Files series, Dourif, opposite Gillian Anderson, rescues it masterfully, his performance calling into question the fairness of corporal punishment, and Agent Scully’s faith. I also think the man can cry on demand.

I long ago took up the task of writing a novel representation of my appreciation for the depth of Boggs’ character. I started a novel called Once Burned to pay homage to Brad Dourif’s portrayal, to give him a new life and a background, to broaden the scope of the character, and hopefully do justice to Dourif’s performance. The excerpt below is an example of Luther’s ruthlessness, but anyone in my circle that’s been privy to the first draft also knows that there is a lot more to Luther Boggs than the ruthless killer, a character who knows only too well what he can do, and who knows that there is a price, though he’ll be damned if any living thing can make him pay it. Enjoy this brief tribute to Brad Dourif on this his 66th birthday, and feel free to tell me what you think.

<hr></hr>

Charleston was old. Luther had grown up in Durham all of his short life, one of the oldest places in North Carolina, but it still sent chills down his spine when he considered just how old Charleston was.

He had been to Raleigh once, but the highway, the shopping malls, even the cars he passed blaring Ray Charles, put an edge on the city and brought it into the twentieth-century. Nothing about Charleston struck him as modern. Even the hotel he approached had a dated feel to it. Nothing he had seen in his dealings with Lonny–with the exception of the strip joint and the car garage–had been newer than 1945. The hotel that he faced was no exception. The plaster wall had been allowed to molder. The façade of the building had appeared no better the last time Luther had been brought there. There was no branding, no signage. The hotel had been there seemingly since the Civil War. Some of the places in Charleston still held the pockmarks of gunfire. Real wrought iron covered the antiquated glass windows of the speak easy. Bands of iron held the door slats together. The handle was a simple latch. He gave it a tug, shouldering Boo-Boo uncomfortably. The door was held fast, locked from the inside. Luther knocked.

A porthole swung open, but in the darkened alley, it only produced a round void in the door. Luther could not see through it. No voice called to him, and Luther doubted he’d be able to hear it through the solid door if anyone had bothered to call. There was no visible scowl like before, when Fletcher had led them to Swinbourne’s. Thinking that he was as yet unrecognized, he tugged on Boo-Boo’s arm and hoisted his head up by his hair, forcing him to face the door. The sudden movement brought a moan from the ex-hitman. The hole in his face that used to be his mouth had finally stopped bleeding.

Something clattered on the other side of the door. To Luther it sounded as if an entire rack of silverware had fallen over, followed by the sound of several locks being thrown in rapid succession. The door flew inward, and a youth not much older than Luther or Fletcher stuck his head out into the darkened ally way. Light fell from behind him, and Luther now heard a jazz band from somewhere deep inside the underground casino.

“Holy shit,” the boy said, “What happened to Boo-Boo?”

“I happened to Boo-Boo,” Luther quipped, omitting Fletcher’s involvement, “Better take me to Lonny.”

“You?” the youth asked, his eyebrows shooting up, “I ain’t takin’ you nowhere, and Lonny ain’t here.”

“That what he told you to say?” Luther sneered back, “His hit failed. If he wants what’s left of the evidence back, he’s gotta man up.”

The youth continued to eye Luther, glancing back over his shoulder a few times. He finally waved Luther through.

“Help me drag this asshole,” Luther demanded. The boy promptly tucked himself under Boo-Boo’s other arm and helped escort Luther through the casino. They avoided the main floor, which Lonny had been so proud of on Luther’s previous visit. They stuck to the wall, but it seemed their efforts were in vain. Heads swiveled from the dice tables and card games. Murmurs rose from the general noise. A few men in evening attire even stepped away from their tables or machines and followed Luther and the nameless boy to the local boss’s offices towards the back of the casino, or rather the front of the hotel.

This racket’s got nothin’ to fear, Luther thought, This whole area’s dead after dark, and wasn’t it Lonny that said Swinbourne owned this place—

Luther gulped a ball of nerves down as if he were swallowing around a golf ball, hoping against his usually rotten luck that Swinbourne would still be out after Fletcher, and not sitting with his peon in his personal suite.

The youth rapped on another wooden door set into the plaster and mud walls that had probably been part of the hotel’s underground illegal activities since before the Civil War.

“What?” yelled a familiar, infuriated voice. Luther’s shoulders sagged in relief. Lonny had indeed barricaded himself in his office. Luther guessed he had only an hour, if that, to make his excuses and get out before Rocky Aldeane or Richard Swinbourne could be awoken and summoned.

“It’s me,” the youth yelled back, “You got company, and well, Boo-Boo’s back, I guess!”

The door was unlocked hastily and dragged inward, it’s bottom scraping the hard-packed earth that separated the middle man’s office from the plush red carpets of the main casino floor. Lonny Pearson stuck his head out and gasped. His eyes widened. Luther would have laughed at the sight, had his nerves not been wound so tight.

Lonny’s shocked expression shifted from Luther, to Boo-Boo. The hitman hung limply between his two lackeys like a wet sheet.

“What the—fuck!” Lonny nearly spat. He glanced over Luther’s shoulder, and Luther followed his gaze. A sizeable group had gathered at the grotto, off the Black Jack tables. Luther picked out a handful of the wait staff that had stopped to gawk. Lonny hung his head and sighed aggressively, “Get in here!”

The boy helped Luther drag Boo-Boo into the office. Lonny slammed the door shut and leaned against it, as if at any moment the group of rubber-neckers might turn into a lynch mob. He grabbed the other boy’s arm, opened the door a crack and shoved him through it.

“Get back to the door. Let me know if there’s even the slightest chance Swinbourne might show up. I wanna know if you catch a whiff of the man’s cologne, got it”

The boy mumbled his assent  and Lonny slammed the door again so fast Luther was half convinced he would slam the boy’s fingers in it. The room seemed unlit, but the bright glare of lamps from the casino floor had dazzled him, and soon the room’s low-light brought its few details into relief. A wooden desk, as old as the room itself, was nudged up against the wall. It was as dirty and disorganized as Lonny’s office at the garage had been. Lonny’s suit coat hung over a high-backed wooden chair, The plaster walls were unadorned, except for a wall calendar. The only light in the room came from the yellow bulb in a desk lamp diffused with a green shade. Luther felt slightly claustrophobic for the second time that night.

“You got a lotta nerve comin’ here after the shit you pulled,” Lonny growled, sounding genuinely pissed, “I stick my neck out for you to get into the game, and this is how you pay me back.”

“Sorry, Dad,” Luther spat, “Didn’t know I was disappointin’ the entire family. Luther ruins Christmas again!”

“Shut up, smart ass!” Lonny yelled before ducking his head and glancing over his shoulder, “and keep yer voice down. And what happened to Boo-Boo?”

“Yer hitman?” Luther sneered, “He brought his gun to play. Poor bastard didn’t even get to use it. You ain’t pissed cuz I fucked up; yer pissed because I’m still alive.”

“Damn straight,” Lonny snapped, “You fucked up big. You think you can just walk away after a massacre like that? In student housing at the fucking university? Have you lost yer fucking mind?”

“Those psychos you set me up with saw right through my cover. They jumped me. What was I supposed to do? Die?

“Yes! I’da got mah money back! I’da strung the little faggots up myself! The least you could have done was died quietly! Cops everywhere, you retard! And now look at my assassin! Swinbourne’s gonna shit himself. Boo-Boo was the best hitman in the South. Is he even still alive?”

“For the most part,” Luther said, toeing the man on the floor, “But he’ll be eatin’ his meals through a straw from now on, I expect.”

“You freak,” Lonny muttered, rubbing his face, “You absolute freak.”

Luther felt a cold chill settle into his stomach. It spread through his nervous system like a deep freeze, slowly spreading to his fingers, down his legs to his toes. He felt the tips of fingers tingle. All of him felt cold, except his face. He could have sworn his ears had caught fire.

“What?”

“You heard me. Yer a monster–a sad freak.”

Luther squared his shoulders; his nostril flared like an angry stud’s might as a stranger crept into his pen.

“I ain’t no freak. What’s the difference between you drug-dealin’ crack whores and child-rapers and me? You people and yer little family ain’t got no right to call me no freak. Have you ever been inside one of those crack dens yer so fond of sending yer legmen to? You ever come face to face with one of those ghouls? I dropped a pack of rabid dogs. I did the world a favor! And you call me a freak? You won’t have me for yer little circus. I’ll kill me a buncha crack babies, yer Boo-Boo and you before I turn into one’a you. They gonna find parts’a you all over this town, and where’s this big family yer so proud of? Where’s the daddy to come bail you out? Ya know what I think? This whole racket’s a sham! This whole thang is danglin’ off the end of a cliff. You and me could be runnin’ this town in a week if we had a mind to.”

Luther slapped a hand to his mouth, only half-realizing where he was going with his tirade. Like a woman accusing her husband of cheating, like a child accusing his father of drinking, Lonny’s eyes widened. He reeled back on his heels, and like anyone who had just been cornered, Luther expected the man would lash out before admitting his guilty conscience.

But he didn’t lash out. The man seemed to plant his feet. He put his hands on his hips.

“Yer lucky it’s just me standin’ here and not Swinbourne,” Lonny admonished. His eyes flicked to the door, as if any second, the man could be standing there, unannounced but watching the whole scene unfold, his arms crossed, their fate decided.

“Let him find out,” Luther spat back, leaning toward Lonny at the waist, “I don’t care.”

“He will make you care,” Lonny warned.

“I’ll do to him what I did to Boo-Boo, what I did to yer crack-heads tonight,” Luther growled.

Lonny stared at him in silence. The room seemed to grow darker, warmer. Luther felt the seconds ticking by before he might have to make good on his threat, but Lonny seemed to be unwinding. He was standing straighter. His fists had come down to his sides and unclenched. He sighed, his shoulders sagging.

“I believe you,” he said.

It was Luther’s turn to be taken aback. He blinked repeatedly.

Well that was fast.

“Now what?” Lonny asked, his voice nearly cracking.

Luther thought fast, “I dunno.”

“Ugh, don’t run yer mouth if yer gonna be useless,” Lonny snapped.

It was true. Luther had not thought that far ahead. He had only come in to intimidate the man. He had forgotten the seed he had planted earlier, that Lonny could lead Charleston’s underground better than Rocky or Swinbourne.

Maybe he just needs a little help, Luther thought without conviction.

“What if I stayed on as yer new hitman?” Luther asked, “I don’t gotta make any more stupid drops, and you get the undisputed best hitman in the South. I only answer to you. Ya know, like a secret weapon.”

Lonny looked askance at the floor, glancing at Luther periodically. He was tempted, Luther knew, but he had nothing else he could use to sweeten the deal without mentioning Fletcher’s involvement.

“I ain’t gotta be paid that much, and the work don’t bother me–“

“I can see that.”

“Rocky and Swinbourne ain’t gotta know about it,” Luther drawled, “I could help you climb the ladder. All you gotta do is say so, and anyone standin’ in yer way will be gone.”

Luther snapped his fingers for good measure.

“Rocky and Swinbourne’ll find out eventually,” Lonny retorted, folding his arms.

“I can take care’a them too, when it comes to it,” Luther offered amiably.

If Fletch don’t beat’chya to it.

“I don’t trust you,” Lonny finally said, shifting uncomfortably.

“Who else you gonna trust?” Luther asked, “Yer sphere of influence weren’t real big to begin with.”

C’mon you greedy asshole; take the bait.

Lonny gave it another moment. Luther’s shoulders were around his ears, the hair on the back of his neck standing on end, waiting any minute for the furtive knock from Lonny’s boy at the door, then the shove as Swinbourne—or Rocky—shouldered his way in, demanding to know why Garrett Fletcher’s accomplice was standing in his office, swathed in his hitman’s dried blood.

“If this goes bad, I’ll rat you out sure,” Lonny said, offering Luther his hand.

“If it goes that bad, I’ll deserve it,” Luther said reassuringly, taking the proffered hand, as custom demanded.

They shook on it, and Lonny seemed to loosen up, “Maybe it’s time Charleston had a fresh, younger boss.”

Luther almost laughed aloud.

“She’ll have it,” he said, a broad smile on his pasty face.

“Now whatta we do about Boo-Boo?” Lonny asked, “We can’t just leave him here for Rocky to find.”

“Prolly gotta kill’im,” Luther said, standing over the unconscious hitman. He knelt beside him and listened to him breath.
“Well that’s not really necessary,” Lonny countered, “He can’t really talk, can he? I could blame it on the Fletcher boy, though I suppose that’s not really his style. By the way, is there any way you could not do that to the victims when I send you on jobs?”

“Yeah I can clean it up, no problem,” Luther muttered, still contemplating Boo-Boo’s blood soaked face and uneven breathing.

“Great.”

“Can’t just dump him somewhere,” Luther went on, “Someone’ll find him. Can’t blame it on Fletch—er. Swinbourne knows better. Better kill him and burn him or somethin’. Get ridda the evidence. Say you sent him off on a job and he never came back.”

Luther covered Boo-Boo’s mouth with his hand and pinched his nose shut. Boo-Boo did not respond right away, and Lonny did not immediately notice.

“I suppose we could—well I guess yer killing him—oh Gawd!”

Lonny leapt backward, stumbling backing towards the far corner of the room, darker even than the grotto into which Luther had dragged the hitman, horror plain on his fragile face.

“Jeezus, you don’t waste time,” he said, his breath coming in quick gasps.

Luther watched Boo-Boo’s legs twitching, a half-smile tugging at his mouth. The color faded out of his field of vision as the unconscious man struggled uselessly, as if in a dream. It was too dark in the room to watch the man’s face undergo the familiar transition from red, to blue, to ash in the few seconds it would take to render him fully unconscious. Only half-conscious anyway, it only took a minute or so for him to stop struggling. Luther counted the seconds down.

One minute, and the body panics; two minutes, and the mind falls unconscious; three minutes and your brain is permanently damaged; four minutes and you fall into the sleep no one ever wakes up from.

The blood loss and shock had done half of his work for him. Boo-Boo died in utter silence. The room took on its previous smallness. The black rushed in, engulfing him. His eyes were unfocused, and he wobbled when he stood up. He realized he’d been holding his own breath, and all the flashing colors, the red at the corner of his eyes, were probably the result of his own lack of oxygen. Lonny watched him like a frightened animal from the corner, his hands balled into fists, his arms across his chest defensively, a look of horror and disgust curling his lips away from his teeth.

“This is why I don’t do the killin’,” Lonny gasped.

“That’s prolly for the best,” Luther agreed.

“You gotta get him outta here,” the man whispered, “Before Swinbourne shows up. He’ll ask questions.”

“I got this,” Luther said, “Just don’t lose yer cool and spill all the beans to Swinbourne. Call yer boy back.”

“Right,” Lonny muttered as Luther hefted Boo-Boo back onto his shoulder. Lonny stuck his head out the door and motioned for someone to come to him. He hissed something to a lackey, and then shut the door again. Luther felt his legs shaking. The knock on the door made Lonny jump visibly. He let the boy from the front door in and together they hauled Boo-Boo out the way they had come. There were fewer people on the casino floor now, Luther noted, and almost no one was at the tables; a group of gamblers huddled in a tight ball in the far corner of the room, behind the Bakarat booth.

“What happened in here?” Luther asked.

“You happened. Can’t bring a half-dead—now really dead—dude through a casino and expect folks’ta stay.”

Luther couldn’t argue with the logic, “What’s gonna happen to this place now?”

“We’ll close up shop for a few weeks until the cops stop poking around. Just do us all a favor, and get the fuck outta here before the sun rises.”

“Who are all these people?” Luther asked, “Aren’t you afraid they’ll go tell someone?”

“Not really. Mostly they’re hotel guests, but you can’t gamble in Charleston,” the lackey grunted, “There’s no one to go tell unless they really don’t mind hinting to the cops that they’re in town to gamble off the books.”

The lackey deposited Luther outside behind the hotel. Luther turned back to slap the boy’s palm, and was met with only a slamming door.

“Charmed,” Luther muttered, kicking the corpse of Boo-Boo over with his toe.
