Folklore Thursday: The Art of Bronze-Age Sword Casting, Part 1 of the “Oh My Ra” Series
August 18, 2016

Hello, Constant Followers and welcome to Folklore Thursday, the Dark Corners off-shoot of the weekly event started by the wonderful people at Folklore Thursday. Folklore Thursday was originally started to celebrate folklore and folks stories from around the world. This segment is Dark Corners tribute to the original concept, though I do not claim any credit or affiliation with that site.

Folklore can be defined as “a body of popular myth and beliefs relating to a particular place, activity, or group of people.”

From what I learned in my brief study of folklore in college, this usually meant that folk traditions were passed by word of mouth. Folk stories can be spread down through the generations by telling and re-telling. Other folk traditions are carried out in a given setting include attire, methods of construction, myth cycles, language (sometimes complicated by dialect), heroic figures, and cult religions not controlled directly by the primary religious influences.

Last Thursday, my partner in crime, Lidia Plaza, and I attended a very intimate class on Bronze-Age style sword casting from Austin, Texas’ own Greg Wenderski, the Sword Casting Guy! This was a great way to kick off the “Oh My Ra” Warhammer Cosplay series!

Folk Traditions: The Art of Sword Casting in the ATX

Greg Wenderski teaches at the Khabele School in Austin, Texas, but he’s not any average teacher. In addition to his work with his students, Greg also teaches the art of Bronze-Age sword casting using molten aluminium. Everyone from adults to kiddos can attend his classes and learn the simple process, yet complex art, of casting a Bronze-Age weapon, and just like the old weapons smiths of old, the process is taught from master–that’s Greg–to the apprentice–that’s you.

Greg Wenderski stands with two of his students as they present their newly cast weapons for the camera. The student on the left holds a dagger. The student in the middle, and Greg, each hold a Gladius, a Greek weapon commonly cast in bronze, but cast in aluminum for Greg's students.

Greg Wenderski holds up shining examples of his students’ work in sword casting.

Last Thursday, Lidia and I arrived at the Khabele School down on Rio Grand Street in the fading light of downtown Austin. Greg met us exuberantly, and we were surprised to be the only attendees that night. Lidia and I got a first-hand taste of the process of casting. To say that it was hot–sultry even–was the understatement of the century. With weather edging up into 104 degrees Fahrenheit, the heat wave was on. Nevertheless we were prepared to get our hands dirty.

Greg doesn’t just cast in aluminium. Though the process is more involved and complex, Greg can also cast in real bronze. To see that, you can watch Greg’s video interview with Tania Ortega on FOX7.

Lidia and I had our choice of weapons for Thursday’s lesson. Of course, since these weapons are going to be for our cosplay projects, we chose based on what our characters would most likely be wielding on the field of battle. Lidia chose a basic blade that she will be modifying with thermal plastics (Worbla’s Finest Art) to give it more of an antique, yet updated look for her space-faring fawn. Since my character will be a Warhammer Tomb King, it made sense for me to choose the weapon most commonly depicted, if not most commonly used, by the Ancient Egyptians themselves, the Khopesh.

Outside, on a plastic folding table, sits a wooden casting box with it's top to the side. Across the open section is the wooden pattern of an Egyptian Khopesh, which will be used to cast an aluminium version.

The wooden Khopesh pattern atop a wooden casting box.

Ancient Egyptian Weapons and Military

The three major Egyptian Kingdoms–classified as the most stable time-periods of the Ancient Egyptian Civilizations before the Greek, and then Roman, occupations–began and ended during the Bronze Age. Egypt’s major moments of upheaval occurred  during the First, Second, and Third Intermediate Periods. Before the invasion of the Hyksos in the Second Intermediate Period, Egypt was largely a peaceful kingdom. Its place in the Nile River Valley successfully secluded it from rival nations, who would have had to cross vast deserts on all sides to reach her.  Bronze-Age armor and smithing, as well as the ores needed to smelt ingots for casting, were rare in Ancient Egypt, and the weapons were more than likely purchased rather than made in Egypt. The vast majority of warfare took place on the ground, with spear and shield, or at long range from bows and arrows. Egypt had little to fear from large invasions most of the time, and so utilized outposts and bastions to keep warring lesser tribes from causing trouble. Chariotry did not enter the Egyptian military until after its import from Eastern Asia during the invasion of the Hyksos. Major weapons would have been throwing sticks, spears, bow and arrow, and later, the Khopesh. Even armor was uncommon, as foot soldiers would have worn basic linen skirts and carried a shield, often using close ranged weapons like maces and short weapons, like the Khopesh, a version of which is depicted below, though this weapon is not cast in bronze, but rather steel.

This is a picture of a Khopesh-like weapon that is a steel version of the bronze age weapon. It is longer than a Bronze-Age Khopesh. It has a wooden handle.

A style of Khopesh cast in steel.

The steel weapon seen here is an adequate depiction. Notice the curved blade, like a sickle used for harvesting grain. The Bronze-Age weapon would have been no longer than 24 inches because, Greg Wenderski said, that was how far bronze could travel in a cast before it became too cool to flow. The hooked portion of the Bronze-Age style weapon would have been blunt. This feature of the weapon is thought to have been more for pulling an enemy into closer range for bludgeoning rather than stabbing or cutting. As the Bronze Age faded out towards the end of the New Kingdom, Khopheshes were cast in iron rather than bronze. Some pharaoh were buried with blunt ceremonial versions of gold. Tutankhamen was buried with two.

The Casting Process

Greg started us off with a brief tutorial. The brutal Austin heat kept many spectators and participants at bay, so Lidia and I were the only guests present. We dived right in.

We were each given a long box with the lids removed. We filled these with a gray sort of "sugar sand" much like very fine beach sand, which we leveled off with a board.

Lidia and I filled boxes with “sugar sand” before leveling them off.

First each of us filled one of Greg’s casting boxes with “sugar sand” a very fine sand that dried quickly in the warm evening air. It was like beach sand, only much finer. The gray color is probably from the fact that Greg reuses the sand after a cast as much as from the fact that it’s slightly damp.

Each box is in three parts: the top, the bottom, and lid. The top and bottom of the casting boxes latch together, a feature Greg told us was a result of one trial in which he poured hot aluminium into the boxes only to have steam separate the seams. Each casting box has had hinges ever since. The lid unscrews with  the aid of a suitably traditional electric drill.

It was important not to pack the sand too tightly, but it was also very important to make sure the edges and corners would form a tight seal during casting. If air were allowed to escape the corners or edges, the sword would possibly be ruined.

Greg assisted us by using the side of the casting box lid to press the wooden pattern into the sugar sand to leave a deep enough indentation in the sand for the aluminium to flow into.

Greg presses our wooden pattern of each of our weapons into the sugar sand. Neither of us were tall enough to do it.

We used the lids of the casting boxes to press the wooden molds of our swords as hard into the sand as we could. We were grateful for Greg’s help, as neither of us were tall enough to leverage the strength needed to press the sword and make the impression that would form the bottom of the sword cast. Though we couldn’t pack the sand down tightly, we tried our best to make sure the sand was very closely packed to the edge of the sword molds.

After we filled the bottom, we dusted the sand with separating minerals to ensure the metal would lift easily from the sand cast. Then we dusted the wooden casting mold with minerals. We reattached the top portion of the box–minus the lid–and packed the top very heavily with the sugar sand, pressing hard, sparing not an ounce of strength needed to make sure the top of the sword left a good impression in the top part of the cast. Then we replaced the lids and put the screws back in, sealing the whole box shut. Greg used a small tube to feel out the pommel of the sword, knocking enough sand away to ensure the molten aluminium would have room to travel freely into the cast.

Next, we lifted the tops off the casting boxes and removed the wooden mold, which left behind a clear impression in the damp sand. We stood the boxes on their ends, knocking off additional sand.

The casting box of Lidia's Greek weapon is ready to be closed up. On the left is the bottom of the box with the wooden pattern (which will be removed). On the right is the indentation left in the top of the box, which was also filled with sand.

Lidia’s casting box how has two almost perfect indentations made to cast her weapon.

On the left is the bottom of the casting box containing the Khopesh wooden pattern (which will be removed). The right side of the box is the top, which was also filled with sand, and will be closed up before the cast.

The Khopesh is ready to be cast as well. All that is left is to remove the wood pattern and close up the box.

We closed up the new casts and stood them up in a metal stand so that they would not fall over in the event of a random and unforeseen toppling, a lesson Greg learned early in his career. We then moved over to the furnace, where Greg was ready to smelt the aluminium ingots he would melt down to cast the swords.

Each of us placed our casting box in a stand on the ground, upright so that Greg could pour the molten aluminium into each box through a hole in the upward end.

Our casting boxes stand upright in order to receive the molten aluminum.

Smelting and Casting

I am holding an aluminium ingot that Greg poured himself. It is a little heavy, but not as heavy as bronze.

Greg’s hand-poured aluminium ingot.

Greg smelts his own aluminium ingots. As he makes his way around town on a daily basis, he picks up aluminium items he finds, things like bike frames, though he cannot use beer or soda cans, as they are lined with plastic. He melts the pieces down into ingots. He also recasts ingots from the unused aluminium from projects. Nothing goes to waste.

Greg has placed a modified propane tank on the brick floor of the outdoor patio. He has modified the propane tank to act as a small furnace.

Greg places two aluminium ingots in the furnace and prepares to melt them down.

The ingots go into the furnace. This particular furnace is a propane tank with the top sawed off, with a concrete lid that swings out. Greg learned on one occasion that setting the lid down in dry Texas grass might start a fire, and so devised a method that never involves setting the lid on the ground.  Aluminium melts at 1, 221 degrees Fahrenheit. Bronze melts at a much higher temperature depending on the amount of copper ore present in the alloy. It would require a furnace lined with ceramic, and a blower, which was not necessary for this particular arts and crafts project.

We stood well back as Greg poured the aluminium. It took surprisingly little metal to finish each cast. Greg poured three molds and had enough aluminium left over to pour into another whole ingot.

In the boxes, Greg has poured a small amount of aluminium into each cast. The aluminium is visible on the top of the box.

The aluminium boxes have been filled with molten aluminium.

We watched the steam billow from our boxes, marveling that Greg’s did not do that, and wondering which one of our weapons we had ruined. Fortunately that was not the case. The visible aluminium would form a small nugget at the end of the pommel that would be knocked off and it’s sharp edge ground down.

I place my left hand on one of the boxes after the metal has set. The box is still incredibly warm, though I can touch it.

My own personal “hand test” to see how hot the box actually got.

The company I work for makes heat insulation products for turbocharged engines. We pride ourselves on being able to touch our product while it’s under heavy heat, though no one can do that for very long as the turbo under the blanket becomes red hot. Here you can see I performed my own hand test on the hot casting box containing Lidia’s weapon.

Greg has taken the box off of Lidia's weapon. The aluminium is solid, if a bit dirty. It lays in it's box, as it's still to hot to touch.

Lidia’s fully cast weapon.

Greg has taken the lid off of the box containing the aluminium Khopesh.

The Khopesh is revealed, fully cast in aluminium.

Both weapons cooled in the almost blistering summer heat in the ATX. Greg dusted them off briefly before whisking them off to the bucket to be quenched.

Greg quenches the cast weapons in a bucket of water on the ground. Quenching hardens the metal, but makes it brittle. Unfortunately, the weapons cannot be tempered, as they are not steel, so no actually hitting anything with them.

Greg quenches the cast weapons in water to cool them.

In most weapons casting, the metal swords would be quenched and tempered to help them retain an edge. However, quenching causes the metal to become very brittle. I’m afraid we won’t be riding into battle with these aluminium weapons in the near or distant future, as one good strike, even to a soft and squishy enemy, would likely snap the weapon off at the hilt. Since these weapons are cast, not forged, we were not going to be tempering the metal. Tempering is the process by which swords are made more flexible to keep them from breaking,. Lidia and I each own Fencing weapons of tempered steel, which makes them bendable and “flicky”. They are not impossible to break, but the bendable blades are easier on the body and less likely to break under the 22k Newtons of force a Fencer is capable of inflicting on their opponent. To give you an idea of the strength of tempered steel, I used to be able to put dents in the hard body of my ’94 Mercury Tracer with just my practice weapon and  with normal lunge attacks.

I hold the Khopesh up to my phone's camera. It is a very unbalanced, but fine weapon for costumes, and it was cast using a historically accurate process.

My finished Khopesh, ready for my costume.

Greg later ground down the edges and flats of both of our weapons, both for safety and for aesthetic. He then wrapped the hilts of each of our weapons in leather.

And there we have it! Two freshly cast Bronze-Age style weapons for our life-encompassing projects. We lost the light not too long after we finished our weapons, but we left knowing we had something very special in hand. Not too many people at the Zombie Ball in October, or the Texas Renaissance Fair will carry weapons they themselves helped cast. Not only is the finished product well worth the price of admission, but the plain weapon can be modified in almost any way you desire. With the availability of thermal plastics like Worbla’s Finest Art, a little wire and clay or clay foam, the sky is the limit with modifications and additions that are sure to enhance the already impressive weapon you will hold in your hand, and allow you to enjoy this piece for years to come.

Conclusion

Greg still has space available for the last Sunday of August (August 28) and September 18 for the all ages class. These are the all-ages classes, so if you’re looking for something to do with the kids that’s education in a good way, then you can get tickets to Greg’s class at the Khabele School here. You can find the Sword Casting Guy on his website, or on his Facebook page.

It was great to work with Greg last week to cast a weapon that is sure to put the finishing touches on my Tomb King Cosplay, and in a true folk tradition. No guide books, no YouTube videos, just the master and his students on a hot evening in Austin, learning techniques that Bronze-Age weapons casters would have used 3,000 years ago. As I become better acquainted with the civilization that Warhammer borrowed so heavily from, I feel closer to the people, as if I were able to bridge the gap between the here and now and the distant past. Maybe one day I’ll have the pleasure of casting a weapon in bronze. If I ever do, I know who to call.

Keep your eyes peeled for more posts as the “Oh My Ra” Series continues. Next week, Linen Bandages and the art of mummifying the Ancient Egyptians!
