Folklore Thursday: Norse Mythology and the Descendants of Sigmar
July 7, 2016


The Norse God, Odin, sits on his throne in this black and white woodcutting. He is flanked by his wolves and his ravens.

A depiction of Odin sitting on his throne with his ravens.

Hello, Constant Followers and welcome to Folklore Thursday, the Dark Corners off-shoot of the weekly event started by the wonderful people at folklorethursday.com. Folklore Thursday was originally started to celebrate folklore and folks stories from around the world.

Folklore can be defined as “a body of popular myth and beliefs relating to a particular place, activity, or group of people.”

From what I learned in my brief study of folklore in college, this usually meant that folk traditions were passed by word of mouth. Folk stories can be spread down through the generations by telling and re-telling. Other folk traditions are carried out in a given setting include attire, methods of construction, myth cycles, language (sometimes complicated by dialect), heroic figures, and cult religions not controlled directly by the primary religious influences.

Religious Rituals and Myth in Pre-Christian Norse Pagans

In a very condensed overview, the mythological cycles and religious practices of pre-Christian Scandinavia (Norse Pagans) were decentralized (read “not organized”, and by that of course we mean no one entity controlled practice at the local level) rituals and practices that were passed orally and whose primary purpose was the “survival and regeneration of the society,” (“Norse Rituals” wikipedia).  There is little written or recorded of the various religious practices, rituals, and worship, and though I lack sufficient primary sources to back up the claim, my experience reading Beowulf  (arguably a very big compromise between the “new customs” and “ancient customs”) revealed that Christians discouraged–if not reviled–the “ancient customs” of the Norse pagans. Unfortunately for contemporary scholars whose interest lies in documenting or compiling the rituals and traditions of the Norse Pagans, the Christian church kept better records during the Conversion Period than the Norse Pagans did. The most exemplary collection of Norse Mythology (though not a great source of information regarding rituals and religious customs) is the Prose Edda and Poetic Edda compiled by Snorii Sturluson.

The practice of religion was, as I mentioned, decentralized, meaning that it was sort of the responsibility of each village and family to carry on the traditions of the Norse Pagans and pass down the “ancient customs” (forn sidr). The structure of the Norse state in the Middle Ages was emulated at the local level by the village leaders, then in the home by the family leader, probably the oldest surviving male progenitor (in ancient Greece, this was called the Patra Familias). If you want an excellent glimpse into the power structure of the Norse pre-Christian Pagans, watch Vikings . It’s not exactly scholarly, but it satisfies as a basic glimpse.

Travis Femmel as Ragnar Lothbrok crouches with his sward, swatched in animal pelt and looking incredibly regal and dangerous.

Travis Femmel as Ragnar Lothbrok, who started out as a farmer and rose through the ranks of his village to become Jarl, which offers a satisfying glimpse into what is commonly known about the Medieval Scandanavian power structure.

According to a well-documented Wiki article, “Sacrifice (blót) played a huge role in most of the rituals that are known about today, and communal feasting on the meat of sacrificed animals, together with the consumption of beer or mead, played a large role in the calendar feasts. In everyday practice, other foodstuffs like grain are likely to have been used instead. The purpose of these sacrifices was to ensure fertility and growth. However, sudden crises or transitions such as births, weddings and burials could also be the reason. In those times there was a clear distinction between private and public faith, and the rituals were thus tied either to the household and the individual or to the structures of society,” (“Norse Rituals” wikipedia).

Pure Speculation: a possible example of the residual affects of Anglo Saxon (read “Viking”) occupation of the British peoples may lie in the Madrigal Feasts of the Yultide during the Medieval times. During the Madrigal Feasts, songs would be sung (like the “Wassail”–consisting of warmed mead or mulled wine) over a wild pig or boar. Though heavily Christianized, the Medieval practice speaks heavily to the rituals of sacrifice at a key point in the Celtic calendar, Yule. During the Yule season, the people celebrated the regeneration or rebirth of the sun’s power, which is not altogether different from some of the birth and regeneration sacrificial rituals of the Norse Pagans.

The Myth of Thor: Protector of the Humans

The Norse God Thor rides his chariot, drawn forward by mountain goats, over snow as the red-headed god waves his mighty hammer, Mjolnir.

The Norse god Thor rides his chariot over snow, wielding Mjolnir.

Thor was incredibly popular during the Middle Ages. During the Conversion, many Scandinavians worse symbols of his hammer, Mjolnir, and his was just one of the many names of the Norse gods that found their way into baby names in defiance of the Conversion. Thor represented humanity’s protection from the many enemies that beset them, namely the Jotuns of Jotunheim, also known as the Frost Giants, who are said to have been driven away by Odin, the All Father. King Olaff II came to embody the myth of Thor. He had red hair, a red beard, and wielded a hammer. After the Christianization, Thor was being invoked in England and Norway as late as the 11th Century. During a time of incredible upheaval involving the villainization and demonizing of the forn sidr, it is not too much of a stretch to postulate that the Norse were looking for guidance in their ever-changing world. As the ages-long symbolic protector of the Norse people, Thor was very likely who they turned to for leadership. Thor and his father, Odin, probably represented a return to the old ways, the vestiges of a glorious time.

Warhammer and Norse Folklore: Sigmar Heldenhammer

Sigmar, the leader of the human empire, holds the might Warhammer aloft over he corpses of Orcs.

Sigmar holds the mighty Warhammer aloft.

In the Warhammer universe, there existed in the Time of Legends a warrior, Sigmar Heldenhammer. He became the eternal patron god of the Cult of Sigmar among the human descendants of the warrior tribes of the world that would later be united under the banner of the Empire of Man. According to the Warhammer lore, Heldenhammer stands for “Hammer of the Goblins”. Sigmar united twelve tribes under a single banner, destroying all who opposed his rule. His rise to power was dogged by the warring tribes such as the Jotuns and Endals. After uniting the tribes, he used his “hammer and fury” to push the Greenskins and Norsii (tribes that worshiped Chaos) from his lands. He ruled for 50 years after being crowned Emperor. During the Golden Age, Sigmar would go on to defeat Nagash the Undying himself to stop him from bringing about the End Times. After defeating the new enemies to the empire, he retreated East, never to be seen again. Many claimed to have seen him in visions, and thus the Cult of Sigmar was born, in which worshippers believed Sigmar had in fact ascended to Heaven.

Sigmar was depicted as a huge man, a barbarian by Wizards of the Coast standards, blond (perhaps Scandanavian in origin?), and he wielded a mighty hammer called the Warhammer. Later in the Warhammer version of Total War, the new emperor leading the human faction must prove himself worthy of wielding the Warhammer by leading his people to glory. The Warhammer (Heldenhammer) bears similarities to Thor’s Mjolnir, the mighty hammer that only Thor could wield. Sigmar united his tribes and proclaimed himself the protector of his people. It was ride with Sigmar or die under the hammer, not unlike the warlike nature of the Vikings. Sigmar, who started out as a “historical figure” in the Warhammer universe was later elevated to a deity and worshiped. Arguably, most mythic figures (it can be surmised) derive from folktales and folkstories regarding legendary hero (Heracles, for example, in Greek myth, was not exactly a god, though later he would be worshiped within cults devoted to his exploits), later deified. In Sigmar Heldenhammer, the legends of the Norse Pagans receive renewed attention.

Side note: there are other aspects of Norse influence in the Warhammer universe. The Dwarf faction of the original table top game were structured by clans that closely resembled the pre-Christian power structure. In Total War, the clans are then divided into villages. Each village is governed/protected by a Thane who answers to a Clan Lord, who then answers to the High King. The Dwafes practice rituals designed to appease the gods and worship their ancestors.

Conclusion

Examining the history of the Norse people and their folklore enraptured me as I made my way through my college classes. We explored many aspects of the world folklore in literature in several of my advanced literature courses. University of Texas at San Antonio professor of the Classics, Ken Burchenal, often assigned projects in which we were meant to explore the influence of folklore on classical literature. Dr. Mark Allen, professor of English Literature at the same school, conducted my senior seminar on the Literature of Troy, in which we tracked the influence of The Iliad down through the ages. I wrote my senior seminar research paper on the influence of Greek myth and The Iliad on Science Fiction and Fantasy, namely regarding the works of Dan Simmons Ilium and Olympos. I consider myself a loyal member of the cult of Odin. Also, Loki forever.

Warhammer embodies the best example of the influence myth holds over contemporary fantasy literature. Dark Corners‘ coverage of Folklore Thursday and it’s relevance to Warhammer continues next week with the Eastern European Folktales of the Undead, Mannfred von Carstein, and the Vampire Lords.
