Folklore Thursday: The God Thoth
June 30, 2016

A stylized depiction of the god, Thoth, in Ancient Egypt, who was often depicted with the head of an Ibis or babboon. Here he is depicted with the Ibis head with a muscular body holding scroll.

Thoth, the Ibis-headed God of Wisdom and writing in ancient Egyptian lore.

Hello, Constant Followers and welcome to Folklore Thursday, the Dark Corners off-shoot of the weekly event started by the wonderful people at Folklore Thursday. Folklore Thursday was originally started to celebrate folklore and folks stories from around the world.

Folklore can be defined as “a body of popular myth and beliefs relating to a particular place, activity, or group of people.”

From what I learned in my brief study of folklore in college, this usually meant that folk traditions were passed by word of mouth. Folk stories can be spread down through the generations by telling and re-telling. Other folk traditions are carried out in a given setting include attire, methods of construction, myth cycles, language (sometimes complicated by dialect), heroic figures, and cult religions not controlled directly by the primary religious influences.

Thoth, Scribes, and Folkways

The God associated in Ancient Egypt with the practice of writing, learning, wisdom, and knowledge was Thoth. Thoth is depicted either as a baboon or a dog-faced baboon, a full ibis, or a man with the head of an ibis. The ibis beak seemed to represent the moon, while the dog-faced baboon or baboon chattered in the morning, Thoth greeting Ra as he rises in the East. It is believed that Thoth was a creator god who gave mankind civilization and language. (Seawright, Caroline “Thoth, God of the Moon, Magic, and Writing”; 2001 thekeep.org). He also assisted Nut in conceiving children (Osiris, Horus (elder) and Set) despite Ra’s protests that any offspring of his and Nut’s would end his reign on Earth (Lace 6).

The Ancient Egyptians employed scribes to read and write. Not all Egyptians had the benefit of those skills. Only certain persons within a family or village could be scribes, and their job was closely regulated. They had to hold apprenticeship within their guild in order to gain the title. Writing for them was a craft, an art form, and a life skill only some were worthy of. It was directly tied to their religion, though they did leave documents behind as clues to everyday life. They composed everything from the mundane, like receipts and calendars, to the important spells used in what has collectively come to be called The Book of the Dead, known individually by the Egyptians as The Book of the Coming of the Forth Day. This is the body of work that includes funerary and protective spells designed to aid the deceased, mummified, member of society through the Duat, the series of challenges faced by the deceased as they make their way to the Hall of the Two Ma’ats. The journey towards final judgement by Osiris in The Hall of the Two Ma’ats was dangerous, and without the knowledge, spells, and names necessary to defeat enemies, the deceased would “die a second death”, having failed to make their way to Osiris be judged, and hopefully join their brethren in the Field of Reeds. Thoth was among the gods whose job it was to assist in getting souls to the afterlife. There is no definitive Book of the Dead because each one was commissioned “to be written during the person’s lifetime and were thus individualized to fit that person’s circumstances,” (Lace, William W. Mummification and Death Rituals of Ancient Egypt, pg 16). In my mind, and to my knowledge, this is one of the few religions in which each person’s needs were seen to in death as opposed to a blanket ritual that encompasses the whole (think Rosary for Catholicism).

Though certain aspects of the religious rites and symbols were closely adhered to, especially in the religious funerary rituals, there were variations on each symbol that was considered acceptable. For instance, the representation of the ba (the human-headed bird representing “personality”) was depicted either as rising through the tomb shaft, hovering above the coffin, or perched in a tree above a tomb (15). These variations represent subtle shifts in folkways, depending almost on taste as form. Each of these variations adheres to the fact that the ba can leave the tomb and roam the earth, and then return. Since most of the funerary spells and depictions were customizable, it was up to individuals how they wanted their tombs to be decorated. As long as the rituals and symbols were adhered to, it could have been simply a matter of taste, or what was fashionable. That, of course, is my own speculation.

The notion of the afterlife and mummification is linked to the creation myths of Ancient Egypt, but it is unclear if the mythic cycle began and then gave rise to the method of burial, or if the Egyptians noticed the particular way bodies buried in the sand seemed to go on and on, giving rise to the idea that the body is the direct link to the afterlife (Lace 19). The iconography, practice, and history are so closely tied together that is difficult to distinguish the beginning of one and the end of another. The origins of and refinement of the religion and the society-wide preoccupation with the celebration of life and death seems inextricably connected. The people believed the gods and the afterlife to be inextricably tied to their lives on Earth, with even the souls of the dead having influence over fortune and misfortune.

There are others in a less historically identifiable capacity that not only believed in gods and the afterlife, but that those gods walked among them and lent them strength and guidance.

Egyptain Tradition Meets Contemporary Literature: Warhammer: Time of Legends

The Warhammer: Time of Legends literary cycle is based off of a table top game by Game Workshops that borrowed real mythic cycles and folklore to build up a gaming system centered on the movement and contest between opposing armies of warring factions. In the current Warhammer cycle in the game Total War, players can build armies under the banner of the Empire, the Dwarfes, the Greenskins (Orcs and Goblins), and the Vampires (base game, not including expansions). Their history is rich and steeped in real-world folklore, not least of which are the chaos hordes. In the original tabletop game, players can build a Horde race (read “hive-mind” or “collective unconsciousness”) called Tomb Kings, which were based almost entirely off of the Ancient Egyptian civilization and borrowed extensively from their military and religious history. In the universe of Warhammer, the region of Nehekhara is located in what we might consider north Africa, like the real Egypt.

This image is a fantasy painting of what might be the great Necropolis of Khemri in the Tomb Kings lore of the table top game, Warhammer.

The remains of a Nehekaran city lay behind and the Necropolis sprawls in the foreground.

The Tomb Kings had their own history and religion that looked very like Ancient Egypt. Nehekhara, the country of origin, was supposedly ruled by a pantheon of gods before the coming of man. They diminished, taking on the aspects of animals or disappearing entirely. Priest-Kings devoted to their worship lead their people in righteous life. Each city–much like Ancient Egypt–had a patron deity. The patron deity of the lesser city of Lybaras was Tahoth, the God of Knowledge and Keeper of the Sacred Lore. Like Thoth, Tahoth is depicted in the pylons of Settra’s court as having an ibis head. In Nagash: The Usurper, the worshipers of Tahoth in Lybaras brought flying ships and their particular knowledge of warfare against the armies of Khemri after Nagash the Usurper unleashed his unholy wrath on Nehekhara, desiring to drive out the old gods and proclaim himself a god.

Though the gods, Tahoth among them, would eventually fall to Nagash, each one represented a tangible power in Nehekhara. The priests were responsible for maintaining the connection to the gods for mankind. The race of Nehekharans was very advanced. They had extremely potent siege machinery, flying machines (Zepplins and airships for the worshippers of Tahoth). The supposedly stood over seven feet tall (Arkhan the Black was one of the tallest Nehekharans on record, towering a head shoulders above his rivals and frienemies), and the people of each lesser city was gifted with the power of their patron deity. The Lybarans were bright, talented people, pale of skin, intelligent, and prized for their technological advances. The leader of Rasetra, Rahk-man-hotep, often made fun of the spindly ruler of Lybaras, a quintessential “nerd”, though Lybaras king was vital in slowing down Nagash’s offensive attack on the holy city of Quatar.

Conclusion

Examining the history and folklore of the of the ancient Egyptians has been a long-time hobby of mine. I remember pleasant childhood memories of rifling through books and watching documentaries on the rites of mummification and the creation myth cycles of one of the world’s oldest civilizations. This love of the ancient world led me to other types of folklore, and my work in college with folklore in literature led me to the conclusion that there is still much to be learned from ancient and revered cultures. Their traditions live on in our own fiction and literature. Studying where our own culture comes from is one of the best ways to get to know ourselves as human beings, and folklore helps us understand that we have been asking ourselves the big questions since time immemorial.

Though our technological advances might outstrip the Lybarans, I can’t help but feel that Thoth, one of my personal patron deities, has always been watching over us.
