Motionless In White Press Release: Roadrunner Records
June 24, 2016

The new logo for Motionless in White ahead of the release of the single track "570".

Motionless In White

Motionless In White, the Scranton, PA metalcore band that took the world by storm in 2010, is making headlines today following the release of their single “570” yesterday and this morning’s press release announcing their acquisition by the major label, Roadrunner Records (Slipknot, Cradle of Filth). It’s common knowledge that Fearless Records was affording the band marginal success. In my humble opinion, MIW is still being billed far too low for their talent level, fan base, and portfolio. Though fans pretty unanimously agree that they (and by “they” I mean “we”–I am loyal withall) deserve a much wider distribution through a major label, the news was received with mixed sentiments. Facebook fans lamented the loss of Motionless In White to Roadrunner over metalcore, thrash, and power metal label, Nuclear Blast (Slayer, Epica, Blind Guardian, Nightwish–do you see where I’m going here?). Others applauded the band’s next leap of success, while still others claim to have seen this coming in the close affiliation of former Roadrunner Records act Cradle of Filth and their frontman, Danny Filth, with “ Puppets 3″ on Reincarnate,  as well as the tour with Slipknot (Roadrunner) and Lamb of God (formerly of Roadrunner Records, now with Nuclear Blast).

MIW band members from left to right: Vinny Mauro (drums), Ryan Sitkowski (guitar), Devin "Ghost" Sola (bass), Chris "Motionless" Ceruli, Josh Balz (keyboard), Ricky "Horror" Olson (guitar).

The 2016 promo picture for band Motionless in White ahead of “570” single release and Van’s Warped Tour.

We’ve seen MIW climb the ranks over the last six years. They released their third major studio album, Reincarnate,  in September of 2014 and toured nearly non-stop for most of 2015 and the early part of 2016, wrapping up in the Spring before heading back out on the road for the Van’s Warped Tour. Yesterday’s single mesmerized fans, lauded by some as a return to Creatures with the power and confidence of Reincarnate. I have more words for that in a second, but right now, let’s focus on the press release.

The image is the press release announcement taken from Facebook describing MIW's pride in being picked up by Roadrunner Records.

Motionless In White Press release announcing their acquisition by Roadrunner Records.

Roadrunner Records

According to knowledgeable persons (wiki), Roadrunner belongs to parent company Warner Music Group–formerly Island Def Jam (a far oversimplified history review). Though the label is carrying heavy-hitters like Slipknot and Gojira, their list of my favorite artists that left the label over mistreatment or lack of promotion (King Diamond in particular) is way bigger than the list of brands they support now. According to history, Roadrunner has a bad habit of running lesser bands off the market or dropping them for trendy acts, bands like Pestilence and Goreguts. Fan favorite and personal role model, Amanda Palmer (Dresden Dolls), dropped Roadrunner records over the portrayal of her body image. Within Temptation, King Diamond, Deicide, Type O Negative, Korn, Cradle of Filth, Nightwish, several of whom are now being supported on Nuclear Blast, all at one time were dropped or left Roadrunner for one reason or another. Though some moved to greener pastures and better European distribution, others had problems with management, marketing, and broken promises.

I am both pleased to hear that MIW has been picked up by the same label Slipknot trusts their brand to, but at the same time, I’m incredibly worried, both for the band and for the state of the metal industry.

The label racket–and it is just that–has made many bands internationally famous, but it has also left a few good bands broken and gasping in a wake of destruction. So many good bands are out there making it on indie or self-published labels that one might wonder just why any good band bothers with major labels anymore. This is not to be confused with my opinions on the digital gluttony that is the indie publication industry, which I still hold in severe reservation despite the fact that my hands are now thoroughly steeped in it. For many bands, indie recognition is just one of the many stepping stones towards getting noticed by major labels and building a brand. For many different bands, it’s all about the music. There are plenty of bands out there that are doomed to fail or never take off, and those are the ones that can’t hack it in the first place and deserve neither indie recognition or major label carriage. Fortunately, that is not MIW’s fate.

Another major question that enters my mind when discussing band infrastructure is the status of touring drummer Vinny Mauro, who replaced Brandon “Rage” Richter in 2014. MIW did not name a new permanent drummer, and did not disclose the name of the person who did the drum tracks in the studio for Reincarnate, but rather saw fit to keep Vinny on as a touring drummer. He was not in any of the promotional materials disseminated by the band in 2015, though he did appear in both of the third album’s official music videos. Only recently has Mauro become a more familiar face, appearing on the cover photo of this morning’s press release. However, there was no announcement with the press release to bring Mauro on as an official member of the band, which would make sense if suddenly MIW found themselves with a corporate sponsor, if you will. If money is the issue behind keeping Mauro on as a scab–because let’s face it, if he’s not an official member, they don’t have to pay him as much–then signing with a major label should remedy that. I don’t put it past Roadrunner to continue screwing Mauro, and I would like to see some announcement that Mauro has been made an official member. For a lot of fans, he’s an integral part of the band.

New Single: “570”

As for the single, “570”, I could not have been happier with it. Chris is such a powerful presence on stage and in the ear canals, and he has come so far vocally.

The song has a dual meaning, revealing some truth in the assessment that the new content from MIW will harken back to a time when the band preached authenticity, anger, and resentment towards the status quo. It is a message to the underdog, the underdog that MIW once was. It’s a proclamation of triumph; it’s looking back at how far the band has come–and Chris Motionless’ personal journey–but a reminder that fundamentally nothing has changed. Motionless In White has been proving their dedication since 2006, a point the song makes perfectly clear, a fact that gives them credibility at a time when belonging to a major label looks like selling out, “ten years on the road, this is sacred.”

“570” is a call to action and a stark reminder that you will never be handed anything in life, with lyrics, “If you mean it, you will make it,” and “I did my time.”

I am overjoyed at the new single, and can’t wait to hear the rest of the album. It’s a shame I won’t make the Saturday show in San Antonio this weekend.

Conclusion: 

I am proud to say I’ve been on board with this group since 2013. I’m proud to be a member of this diverse, young, loyal fan base, and I’m proud of how far the band has come since their first album. I’m excited to see where the band is headed.

Who is Motionless In White? MIW is a metalcore band who got their start touring on low-billed acts, and they’ve been doing the work of producing music and touring since 2006. Their first studio album was Creatures in 2010, followed by Infamous in 2012, then Reincarnate in 2014. You can catch them touring with the Van’s Warped Tour this summer. Check out their website for tour dates.

A gothic building with an antiquated light board that reads "Scranton: The Electric City" in the style characteristic of the artwork from Reincarnate with a more industrial feel.

Taken from the homepage of MIW.

My Personal Recap on the State of Metal and Radio in 2016

Many folks here in Austin, and San Antonio, might agree with me that metal ain’t what it used to be. In Austin, you can get metal–and new releases in metal–only twice a week. Chuck Loesch does No Control Radio on Friday nights at 10 Central on 101X, and L.A. Lloyd (formerly of 99.5 KISS in San Antonio) does the Rock Countdown on KLBJ at 10 Central on Saturday nights. There you’ll hear a delightful mixture of heavy metal, metalcore, power metal, the New Metal revival, and bands like In This Moment, Trivium, October Burns Red, new and old Chevelle, new and old Stone Sour, and a slew of old favorites and emerging talent, both female and male fronted, that you just don’t hear in the mainstream. That’s the problem. Metal is not mainstream, not even when it was mainstream in the 90s. We’ve always been a fringe, and as much as I like that, we’ve encountered an even heavier dismissal of the sound and the genre as the years have passed. Radio presence is slim to nil. Why should it be otherwise? The masses are clamoring for Drake, Taylor Swift, The Weekend, 21 Pilots (how dare Goth kids even speak that name!), and the Biebs. Even in Alternative, Alabama Shakes is the only band asking the hard questions. There is no anger left on the radio, and there is no place for it. The media is shaping our consumption in music with air time bought and paid for by labels no one should listen to with songs from talentless hacks containing messages about women and wealth that I don’t want my stepson to hear. When Meghan Trainor sings about being yourself and loving your body, then loses weight under pressure from the label, it’s hard to know who the heroes are and who is just out to make a few dollars for a couple weeks. We can sit here and say nothing about Motionless In White will change under label influence, but who knows what will be asked of them in the coming years. We saw the reception Ghost had when they accepted their Grammy, an unaired acceptance speech given to a disinterested group of milling celebrities and early arrivals. Metal has no place in the mainstream. The messages we’re trying to send get no bandwidth. The music industry that has the most honest grouping of like-minded individuals and consistent, loyal fan base is met with nothing but mainstream white noise.

People are questioning whether or not this dream was the best course of action for MIW to follow, and only time will tell. If fans think MIW will suddenly appear on the radio, they are sadly mistaken. There’s no room for anger in the mindless gluttony of radio-ready hits, half-insane Rhianna knock-offs, the truly insane Taylor Swift, and quasi-folk infusion bands.
